hello mass fans continuing the series on
disease modeling today we're looking at
another extension of the si our model to
include an incubation time for the
disease once again we start with the
same three variables s for susceptibles
I for infective and R for recovered so
our first equation will be d s by DT the
rate of change of the number of
susceptibles over time and this is going
to decrease when there is transmission
of the disease so that is minus R R is
the transmission rate remember times I
times s then our second equation di by
DT this represents the rate of change of
our infective population so if the
susceptible population decreases
somebody is moving from susceptible to
infective so this will increase at the
same rate but then people who are
infected with the disease might recover
and this we say happens at a constant
rate a and it's proportional to the
number of infective 's and then finally
our rate of change of the removed
population r dr by dt this one is equal
to the growth here because the infective
's are moving into the removed part of
our population at this rate a i so this
is just the same basic SI r model that
we've seen before
now we make the additional assumption
that the disease has an incubation
period equal to tau and what this means
is that a susceptible that comes into
contact with an infective and catches
the disease will not actually move to
being in the infectious category for a
certain period of time which we label
tau so you can think of this as somebody
catching the disease from an infectious
person but then taking some amount of
time before they themselves display
symptoms and therefore become infectious
to others what this means for our model
is that our variables i
s which originally were just functions
of time T will now be functions of time
t minus tau so here we're going to
replace the I and s which were
implicitly functions of T with I of T
minus the delay period tau times s of t
minus tau and we're going to do the same
in the di by DT equation because this
term here remember is the contact the
transmission of the disease but then the
final term the minus a times I that will
just remain as a function of time T
because we are only assuming there's a
delay there's an incubation period when
moving from s to AI which is represented
by this term here the movement from I to
R the recovery of the disease we are not
at this point incorporating a delay
period so this is also just a function
of time T so this is our full set of
equations for the SI R model
incorporating an incubation time equal
to tau in the context of kovat 19 this
incubation period is believed to be
around five days so in the context of
the entire pandemic which is believed to
last several months possibly even over a
year the incubation period is very small
you can actually explore this model for
yourself and adjust the incubation
period tau using this fantastic online
resource courtesy of math agon so what
you will see is that as we increase tau
away from zero and begin to incorporate
the incubation period into our original
si our model the curves for SI and R
begin to shift further and further to
the right
they are moving further forwards in time
now interestingly you may notice that
the curves have approximately the same
shape so whilst everything is being
shifted into the future it might suggest
that the dynamics are fundamentally the
same and this is something that we're
now going to investigate now remember in
the context of kovat 19 we mentioned
that the incubation period tau is small
compared to the time scale of the
disease and this is actually generally
true for any disease that we model using
this method so we have a system of
equations containing a small parameter
which is suggesting to the
mathematically minded among us that we
want to do a Taylor expansion we want to
make an approximation to try to simplify
this pretty complicated looking term
into something we can deal with so what
we're going to do is take this our I s
term and we're going to expand around T
where we're assuming that tau is our
small parameter so doing this we have R
of I T minus tau times s of t minus tau
and we can say that this is
approximately equal to RI of T s of T
plus R tau I times s derivative plus
order tau squared what we do next is to
take our approximation over here and
substitute it into our differential
equations now at first this might not
look any simpler than what we started
with but the key thing to remember is
that the Tau term which was originally
inside our unknown variables through our
Taylor expansion approximation for small
tau we've been able to write it in front
of something which we can now try to
work out the next step involves some
pretty heavy algebra because what we
want to do is take this term the is
prime term which is in both equations
and try to simplify this into something
more manageable and we do this by using
the fact that these equations this is s
Prime and this is I prime so this is a
product of the
two derivatives and then we can
substitute for s Prime and I prime and
rearrange to get a simplified expression
for is prime so I'm going to leave out
the steps leave it as an exercise to the
viewer and what you will end up with is
the following is prime is equal to I s
multiplied by Oh s minus I minus a on
the numerator and then the whole thing
is divided by 1 minus R tau PI minus s
we call this is because we have this
common factor and in this complicated
expression we just write as F of a so
this just shows that it's a function of
several variables several constants and
functions which is given by this
expression but writing it like this
allows us to substitute it into our full
system as follows so we're going to
neglect the order tau squared terms I'm
going to remember that we've neglected
them but for now we don't need to write
them in our equations anymore and we're
going to substitute the is prime term
here for is F so this is now I s and I'm
going to leave out all of the things
that F is a function of again we're
going to just have this expression here
to remind us what F represents so we're
going to do the same for the bottom one
here as well so we now get an is x off
function you may also have noticed that
I've rubbed off the dr by dt equation
because that is now decoupled from the s
and i equations and what that simply
means is it was only in terms of i so if
we can solve these two for i and s then
we can solve for R so we're just going
to ignore that
equation for now and proceed with these
first two following what we've done in
previous videos when analyzing these
equations we combine them to get an
equation for di by D s and you do this
by taking the DI by DT equation and
dividing by the d s by DT equation again
this might not look like a
simplification of the original system of
equations but bear with me we've got a
towel term here and also on the top and
remember tau is a small parameter and
we're ignoring terms of order tau
squared so what we can do with this term
on the bottom is another expansion now
you may be familiar with the binomial
expansion also sometimes known as the
geometric series or even just a standard
Taylor expansion but it says that 1 plus
something where something is small which
is true here for tau the incubation
period remember is approximately equal
to 1 minus tau F so the - here comes
down when you do this expansion plus
order tau squared so what this means for
our expression up here is we can take
this term from the denominator because
the power is minus 1 you use this
expansion and this gives us something on
the numerator now if we do that we end
up with the following di by D s we've
got our 1 over that so minus 1 in our I
guess but now we've got the numerator
the top multiplied by this term here 1
minus tau F so the 1 will just give us
one of these three terms but now we've
got minus tau F times the three terms so
the first term gives us minus tau F RI s
then we have minus comes a plus
a towel a towel i F and then the last
term would give us a tau squared term
multiplying tau F by tau R is f but
we're neglecting order tau squared so we
just have that plus order tau squared
we're almost there
the very final step is just to look at
this expression and try and figure out
what's going on so we have a minus 1
over R is that's fine we've got R is
minus AI plus tau R is F minus tau R is
F so these two now perfectly cancel out
and then we've got a plus a tau I F and
then order tau squared so what we can
write this as in fact is di by DX is
equal to minus R is minus AI divided by
r is plus order so this term is a towel
and we also had tau squared now this
potentially looks like something you've
seen before I hope so this is the exact
same equation up to this point if we
ignore order a tau and order tau squared
terms this equation is the exact same
equation that we got for the standard SI
r model with no incubation time or with
an incubation time tau of 0 so the big
result here is that the dynamics of our
model are actually unchanged as long as
we can neglect terms of order a tau and
tau squared which is why we saw the same
shape to our curves when we plotted them
earlier using math ago and what this
means in practice is that even when we
include the incubation period tau NR si
R
the actual results the structure and the
behavior of the system will actually be
the same as the basic SAR model that I
looked at in the very first video so for
a disease like Cove in nineteen where
tau is indeed small then it's very
reasonable to ignore terms of order a
tau and tau squared so this tells us
when trying to model the pandemic and
trying to understand the spread of the
disease
we can actually simplify our models and
we don't need to worry about the
incubation period because to leading
order the dynamics will be exactly the
same this means that the mass is exactly
the same and so our response is going to
be the same thing I've said many times
before you need to wash your hands stay
at home and practice social distancing
thank you everybody for watching if
you've enjoyed this video please do
subscribe to my channel and I'll be back
soon with some more maths take care
you